Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

v

Acronyms, Symbols and Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

vi

1 Introduction
1.1

1

Urban Transportation Importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

1.2 Approaches to Transportation Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

1.3 Why Simulation? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

1.4

How Simulations Are Run . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

1.5

Key Metrics for Transportation Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

1.6

Current Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

1.7

Need for a Testing Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

1.8

Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

1.9

Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

1.10 Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

1.11 Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

1.12 Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

1.13 Significance and Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

2 Background and Related Work

8

2.1

Evolution of Traffic Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

2.2

Simulation Scope and Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

2.3

Major Urban Mobility Simulation Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

2.4

Incompatibilities Across Simulators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

2.5

Existing Mobility Benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

2.6

Benchmarks in Other Domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

2.7

Reproducibility in HPC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

2.8

Summary of Research Gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

3 Proposed Methodology

14

3.1

Framework Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14

3.2

Unified Data Schema Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15

3.3

Data Sources, Acquisition, and Preprocessing

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19

3.4

Benchmark Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22

i

3.5

Evaluation Metrics and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25

3.6

Data Management and Ethics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

27

3.7

Schedule and Timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

28

4 Experimental Plan, Environment, and Risks

31

4.1

Experimental Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

4.2

Software and Compute Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

33

4.3

Resources and Compute Budget . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

33

4.4

Risks and Mitigations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

33

4.5

Limitations and Threats to Validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

34

4.6

Deliverables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

34

References

35

A Unified Schema: Worked Examples

38

A.1 Bundle Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

38

A.2 config.xml . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

38

A.3 network.xml . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

39

A.4 signals.xml . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

39

A.5 demand.csv . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

40

A.6 manifest.xml . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

40

A.7 Validators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A.8 XML Schema Integration (XSD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

ii

42

List of Figures
3.1

Framework overview: standardized benchmark layer. . . . . . . . . . . .

15

3.2

Unified schema pipeline and simulator adapters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17

3.3

End-to-end benchmark process with normalized inputs. . . . . . . . . . .

25

3.4

Evaluation framework: fidelity, scalability and reproducibility. . . . . . .

27

3.5

Planned research timeline from Sep 2025 to Jul 2026. . . . . . . . . . . .

28

iii

List of Tables
2.1

Comparison of Major Urban Mobility Simulators . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2

Comparison of inputs and configuration across major simulators. . . . . . . 11

3.1

Canonical schema specification with enforced validation rules. . . . . . .

18

3.2

Data provenance, licensing, and canonical bundle composition. . . . . . .

20

3.3

Scenario summary by metropolitan area. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22

iv

10

Abstract
Urban commute simulations inform critical decisions in congestion management, transportation planning, and infrastructure policy. Although simulators such as SUMO, MATSim, and POLARIS offer realistic and scalable modeling capabilities, their heterogeneous
data schemas, configuration styles, and execution pipelines prevent fair, reproducible crosscomparison. As a result, researchers cannot determine whether differences in outcomes
arise from modeling assumptions, implementation details, or inconsistent experiment
setups. High-performance variants such as LPSim and QarSUMO introduce further
divergence, yet still lack standardized evaluation practices. This thesis presents SimForge,
a reproducible cross-simulator testing framework that unifies input formats, execution
pipelines, and performance metrics across CPU, GPU, and HPC environments. SimForge
enables consistent evaluation of scalability, accuracy, and runtime efficiency, providing an
open foundation for transparent and repeatable urban mobility research.

v

Acronyms, Symbols and Notation
Acronyms
Acronym

Definition

CRS

Coordinate Reference System

DOT

Department of Transportation

GEH

GEH traffic count statistic (UK DfT)

GTFS

General Transit Feed Specification

HPC

High-Performance Computing

KPI

Key Performance Indicator

KS

Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistic

LPSim

GPU-accelerated large-scale traffic simulator

MATSim

Multi-Agent Transport Simulation

OD

Origin–Destination

ODbL

Open Database License

OCI

Open Container Initiative

OSC

Ohio Supercomputer Center

OSM

OpenStreetMap

POLARIS

Agent-based transportation modeling framework

QarSUMO

High-performance SUMO extension

SLURM

Simple Linux Utility for Resource Management

SUMO

Simulation of Urban MObility

Symbols
Symbol

Definition

Tsim

Simulated time advanced by the engine (in seconds)

Twall

Wall-clock runtime (in seconds)

SRT

Simulated-to-real-time ratio, SRT = Tsim /Twall (dimensionless)

X

Scalar KPI (e.g., mean link speed, throughput)

µ(X)

Mean of X across repeated runs (replicates)

σ(X)

Standard deviation of X across repeated runs

R

Reproducibility index, R = 1 − σ(X)/µ(X) (dimensionless: higher is better)

∆

Absolute difference: %∆ = relative change (percent)
vi

∆t

Discrete simulation time step (in seconds)

N

Number of agents (vehicles)

E

Number of directed edges (links)

Units. Unless stated otherwise, SI units are used: length (meters, m), speed (kilometres
per hour, km h−1 ), time (seconds, s), and power (watts, W). All times are measured from
scenario start (t = 0).

vii

Chapter 1
Introduction
This chapter introduces the broader context needed to motivate the development of a crosssimulator testing framework for urban mobility research. It begins by outlining why urban
transportation systems matter and how researchers study them using empirical, analytical,
and simulation-based approaches. The chapter then explains the role of simulation, how
modern transportation simulators operate, and the key metrics used to evaluate their
outputs. Building on this foundation, it identifies the methodological and reproducibility
challenges that currently limit cross-simulator comparison, establishing the need for a
unified and reproducible testing framework.

1.1

Urban Transportation Importance

Urban transportation systems shape economic productivity, commuter well-being, environmental quality, and long-term infrastructure investment. Congestion alone costs major
metropolitan regions billions of dollars each year through lost time, fuel consumption,
and reduced network efficiency. Transportation agencies therefore rely on analytical
tools to understand network behavior, evaluate policy interventions, anticipate congestion
patterns, and guide infrastructure planning [1]. A reliable modeling foundation is essential
for assessing strategies such as congestion pricing, transit prioritization, traffic signal
coordination, and multimodal integration before deployment.

1.2

Approaches to Transportation Research

Transportation research employs several methodological approaches. Empirical studies
analyze traffic counts, probe-vehicle data, sensor feeds, and survey-based travel diaries.
Analytical and statistical models support demand estimation, route choice modeling, and
macroscopic flow approximations. Simulation-based methods reproduce detailed network
dynamics, enabling controlled experimentation under varying conditions [2, 3, 4]. Each
approach contributes unique strengths: empirical data offers ground truth but is sparse
or costly, analytical models provide tractability but lack behavioral richness, simulation
allows city-scale experimentation but depends heavily on configuration and computational
environment.

1

1.3

Why Simulation?

Simulation has become a cornerstone of transportation research because it enables scalable,
repeatable, and counterfactual experimentation. Agent-based models can represent millions
of travelers and vehicles interacting under diverse scenarios, allowing researchers to test
policies, assess infrastructure changes, and study behavioral responses under controlled
conditions. Unlike real-world experiments, simulations allow precise manipulation of
demand, routing, and network topology. However, simulation outcomes depend on
complex software stacks, calibration procedures, demand models, and hardware execution
strategies. These dependencies introduce reproducibility challenges that complicate
scientific evaluation and policy decision-making [5, 6, 7].

1.4

How Simulations Are Run

Modern transportation simulators differ widely in design philosophy, input formats, routing
rules, and computational architectures. Microscopic simulators such as SUMO model
lane-level movements: mesoscopic and activity-based systems such as MATSim simulate
aggregated or agent-based flows, large-scale multi-agent frameworks such as POLARIS
integrate scheduling, routing, and demand generation, and high-performance platforms
such as LPSim and QarSUMO leverage GPU or distributed execution for extreme-scale
workloads [8, 3, 4, 9, 10]. Each simulator employs distinct configuration styles, network
encodings, demand representations, and runtime models (fixed time steps vs. event-driven
clocks). As a result, even nominally similar scenarios often produce diverging outputs,
making direct comparison difficult [11, 12, 13].

1.5

Key Metrics for Transportation Simulations

A wide range of metrics are used to evaluate traffic simulations, validate behavioral fidelity,
and benchmark computational performance. Commonly studied quantities include:
• Traffic counts: link-level flow volumes and turning movements.
• Speed profiles: average link speeds, spatial congestion patterns.
• Travel-time patterns: trip durations, OD distributions, and delay.
• Network throughput: vehicles completed per unit time.
• Fidelity: RMSE or GEH error against observed link counts, KS statistics for
comparing travel-time distributions, and differences in link-level speed and flow
profiles relative to ground truth.
2

• Scalability: runtime vs. agent count, vehicles/sec per core, memory usage, and
compute efficiency across CPU, GPU, and HPC systems.
• Reproducibility: run-to-run variance under fixed seeds and identical input bundles.
These metrics are essential for validating model behavior, comparing simulation engines,
and assessing computational performance. However, differences in metric definitions,
measurement intervals, sampling strategies, and reporting formats across simulators
hinder apples-to-apples comparison.

1.6

Current Challenges

Despite major advances in modeling, urban mobility simulation faces persistent methodological challenges:
• Heterogeneous input schemas: each simulator uses its own formats for networks,
demand, and signals [8, 3, 4].
• Non-uniform calibration practices: many studies rely on unpublished datasets
or heuristic tuning procedures that cannot be reproduced [6, 5].
• Divergent execution pipelines: simulators vary in threading models, GPU usage,
event processing, and time-step policies, making runtime comparisons inconsistent
[14, 15].
• Lack of deterministic configurations: fixed seeds, version-pinned dependencies,
and controlled environments are rarely documented [16, 17].
• Inconsistent metric definitions: flow, speed, and travel-time metrics are computed differently across tools.
These inconsistencies make it difficult to reproduce published results, evaluate new
simulation engines, or compare platform behavior under standardized scenarios.

1.7

Need for a Testing Framework

The transportation research community lacks a reproducible, simulator-neutral framework that enforces canonical inputs, deterministic execution, and standardized metric
definitions. Without such infrastructure, differences between simulation engines cannot
be interpreted with confidence: observed deviations may reflect modeling choices, implementation artifacts, or hardware effects rather than true behavioral differences. A unified
testing framework would:
3

• enable transparent cross-simulator comparison,
• provide a reproducible baseline for future studies,
• support rigorous validation of new modeling techniques,
• reduce duplication in dataset preparation and calibration,
• and improve reliability for practitioners and policymakers.
Benchmarking efforts in adjacent fields (e.g., MLPerf) illustrate how shared rules, datasets,
and metrics accelerate scientific progress [18]. Urban mobility simulation lacks an equivalent standard, motivating the development of a unified framework. We refer to this unified,
simulator-neutral testing framework as SimForge.

1.8

Motivation

The reproducibility concerns widely recognized in computational science apply directly
to large-scale mobility simulations [5, 7]. Published studies often depend on custom
datasets, ad-hoc calibration heuristics, or hardware-specific optimizations that are difficult
to reproduce across environments [15, 19]. Without fixed seeds, synchronized clocks,
and version-pinned dependencies, reported performance and fidelity results cannot be
independently verified [16, 17]. For agencies and research groups, this lack of reproducibility
undermines trust in simulation-based decision-making. A unified framework enforcing
canonical inputs, deterministic execution, and standardized metrics would strengthen
methodological transparency and allow true apples-to-apples evaluation across simulation
engines [20, 18].

1.9

Problem Statement

Despite substantial progress in urban mobility modeling, there is currently no open,
simulator-neutral framework that ensures methodological consistency across engines
[21, 1]. Existing studies typically rely on customized datasets, differing parameterizations,
and uncontrolled runtime environments, which makes results difficult to reproduce or
compare [5, 15].
Because each simulator uses its own input formats, calibration practices, execution
pipeline, and metric definitions, researchers cannot determine whether observed differences
in outputs arise from genuine modeling assumptions or from incompatible experimental
setups [8, 3, 4, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. This lack of a standardized, reproducible basis for
cross-simulator evaluation undermines the credibility of comparative studies and limits the
ability of practitioners to select appropriate tools for large-scale urban commute analysis.
4

The central problem addressed in this thesis is the absence of a reproducible, standardized cross-simulator testing framework that:
(a) provides a common experimental basis for multiple transportation simulators, and
(b) enables fair, transparent comparison of fidelity, scalability, and reproducibility across
heterogeneous software and hardware environments.

1.10

Objectives

This research aims to design and implement SimForge, a reproducible, transparent, and
extensible cross-simulator testing framework for evaluating large-scale urban commute
simulators. The specific objectives are as follows:
1. Framework Design: Develop SimForge, a reproducible cross-simulator testing
framework integrating major agent-based engines: SUMO, MATSim, POLARIS,
LPSim, and QarSUMO to enable consistent performance and fidelity comparisons
[8, 3, 4, 9, 10].
2. Data Standardization: Define a unified data schema (canonical bundle) encompassing
network topology, demand profiles, signal control, and configuration parameters, aligned
with established data models such as OpenStreetMap and GTFS [22, 23].
3. Reproducible Execution: Implement deterministic converter modules and a containerized execution pipeline (OCI/Singularity, SLURM) governed by fixed random
seeds and synchronized simulation clocks to ensure replicable runs across heterogeneous
environments [24, 16, 19].
4. Evaluation Metrics: Design evaluation procedures for fidelity, scalability, and reproducibility, incorporating per-core and per-watt normalization to assess efficiency across
CPU, GPU, and HPC configurations [14, 15, 25].
Open Test Suite Release: Publish an open test suite, including manifests, checksums,
and automated validation scripts, to enable independent replication and communitydriven extensions [20, 21].
These objectives collectively support the creation of a standardized, verifiable platform
for cross-simulator performance assessment and reproducibility research in large-scale
mobility modeling.

5

1.11

Contributions

This thesis plan makes four principal contributions toward the design and implementation of SimForge, a standardized and reproducible cross-simulator testing framework
for large-scale urban mobility research:
C1. Canonical Schema and Validators: Development of a mixed-format, simulatoragnostic input bundle consisting of network.xml, demand.csv, signals.xml,
config.xml, and a manifest file. The schema enforces field-level validation rules
and pre-run integrity checks, extending standardized data representations such as
OpenStreetMap and GTFS [22, 23].
C2. Deterministic Adapters: Creation of one-to-one, auditable mappings from the
canonical schema to each simulator’s native input structure for SUMO, MATSim,
POLARIS, LPSim, and QarSUMO, ensuring consistent parameter translation,
unit normalization, and time-step synchronization [8, 3, 4, 9, 10].
C3. Reproducible Execution Pipeline: Implementation of version-pinned, containerized workflows (OCI/Singularity) with fixed random seeds, consistent time-step policies,
and hash-verified inputs and outputs. These mechanisms ensure that repeated executions yield identical results across CPU, GPU, and HPC environments [24, 16, 17, 26].
C4. Hardware-Normalized Evaluation: Definition of key performance indicators
(KPIs) for fidelity: RMSE, GEH, and KS statistics, scalability: runtime vs. agents,
vehicles/sec per core, and vehicles/sec per watt, and reproducibility: quantified as
R = 1 − σ/µ, all reported with confidence intervals and hardware normalization
[14, 15, 25].
Collectively, these contributions establish a transparent and extensible foundation for
evaluating the consistency, efficiency, and reproducibility of urban commute simulators
under standardized experimental conditions.

1.12

Research Questions

This study is guided by four core research questions that address the fidelity, scalability, and
reproducibility of large-scale urban mobility simulators under standardized experimental
conditions [21, 7, 5, 19].
RQ1. Fidelity: Under identical canonical inputs, how closely do different simulation engines
reproduce observed traffic counts, link-level flow distributions, and trip-time patterns
across cities and demand levels [8, 3, 4, 9, 10]?
6

RQ2. Scalability: How do runtime performance and throughput scale with agent count
across CPU, GPU, and HPC environments once normalized per core and per watt
[14, 15, 25]?
RQ3. Reproducibility: When executed with fixed seeds, deterministic adapters, and
containerized environments, what level of run-to-run variance remains, and which
components, randomized routing, scheduling, or I/O contribute most to this deviation
[16, 17, 26]?
RQ4. Trade-offs: What fidelity throughput trade-offs emerge across simulators, and are
these relationships consistent across different urban topologies, congestion regimes,
and computational architectures [11, 12, 13]?
Together, these questions aim to quantify not only the technical performance of each
simulator but also the reproducibility limits inherent to current urban mobility modeling
practices.

1.13

Significance and Scope

This research lies at the intersection of urban mobility simulation, high-performance
computing (HPC), and reproducible computational science. By standardizing data representation, configuration management, and execution workflows across multiple simulation
engines, the project advances both methodological and infrastructural reproducibility
[5, 6, 15]. The resulting SimForge framework provides a credible foundation for comparative studies, facilitates fair performance evaluation, and establishes a reusable open
standard for the transportation modeling community [21, 18, 20].
Scope boundaries: The study focuses on commute-scale, road-based traffic simulation
with temporal resolution at the minute level. Behavioral micro-nuances such as rare
driver archetypes or stochastic lane-change variations are excluded unless they significantly
influence key performance indicators (KPIs) related to fidelity, scalability, or reproducibility.
Experiments cover three representative metropolitan networks, Chicago, New York
City, and Los Angeles, and three demand levels (50K, 500K, and 5M trips), enabling
evaluation under diverse congestion and scaling conditions. Broader geographic extensions
and multimodal integration are identified as directions for future work.

7

Chapter 2
Background and Related Work
This chapter situates the proposed SimForge testing framework within the broader
context of transportation modeling and simulation research. It first reviews the historical
evolution of traffic simulation paradigms, emphasizing how methodological advances have
shaped today’s heterogeneous ecosystem of tools. It then defines the operational scope,
terminology, and data conventions adopted in this work, clarifying how the framework
aligns with existing practices while addressing their reproducibility gaps.

2.1

Evolution of Traffic Simulation

Traffic simulation has undergone over six decades of evolution, progressing from coarse
macroscopic flow models to sophisticated, agent-based systems capable of representing
millions of individual travelers. Early macroscopic models emphasized aggregate variables
such as traffic density, flow, and average velocity, often relying on continuum approximations of road networks. Subsequent microscopic approaches began modeling individual
vehicle dynamics, incorporating acceleration, car-following, and lane-changing behaviors
to capture emergent traffic phenomena with higher fidelity [8, 3, 4, 2].
Mesoscopic and hybrid frameworks later emerged to strike a balance between behavioral
realism and computational scalability, combining microscopic detail within local regions
with aggregate representations elsewhere. The recent generation of simulators leverages
advances in high-performance computing, particularly distributed-memory architectures
and GPU acceleration to execute large-scale, city-wide scenarios in near real time [9, 10,
11, 12, 25].
This technological progression has enabled unprecedented spatial and temporal detail
in urban mobility modeling while simultaneously revealing challenges in cross-simulator
compatibility, standardization, and reproducibility.

2.2

Simulation Scope and Terminology

This work focuses on commute-scale urban traffic simulation, where outputs include
link-level flow and trip-time statistics at minute-level temporal resolution. The SimForge
framework targets large metropolitan networks modeled under realistic demand and
congestion patterns [21, 1].
For clarity, the following terms are used throughout this thesis:
8

• Microscopic, Mesoscopic, and Agent-Based Simulation: Microscopic models
capture individual vehicle dynamics (acceleration, car-following, and lane changing),
mesoscopic models represent grouped vehicle packets or flow quanta and agent-based
models extend these by assigning travel plans and behavioral attributes to individual
travelers [3, 4, 2].
• Key Performance Dimensions: Fidelity denotes agreement with observed link
counts and trip-time distributions, Scalability measures runtime or throughput growth
relative to the number of simulated agents and Reproducibility refers to run-to-run
invariance under fixed random seeds and identical configurations [5, 6].
• Canonical Inputs: A simulator-independent, normalized input bundle (§3.2) consisting of standardized network, demand, and configuration files, designed to support
direct conversion into the native formats of multiple engines [22, 23].

2.3

Major Urban Mobility Simulation Systems

Large-scale commute simulation has diversified across several major platforms, each
reflecting distinct modeling philosophies, computational trade-offs, and architectural
priorities. The following systems represent the state of the art in open and research-grade
urban mobility simulation.
SUMO (Simulation of Urban Mobility) is an open-source microscopic traffic simulator
that models detailed vehicle interactions, lane changes, and traffic signal control. It is
widely used for transportation research and supports a broad range of import formats,
routing algorithms, and calibration tools [8].
MATSim (Multi-Agent Transport Simulation) is a mesoscopic, agent-based framework
built around iterative replanning and activity-based demand generation. It emphasizes
individual traveler behavior and long-term equilibrium modeling [3].
POLARIS, developed by Argonne National Laboratory, is a multithreaded agentbased simulator that integrates land-use, travel demand, and behavioral models within a
unified architecture. It is designed for detailed policy analysis and scenario testing at the
metropolitan scale [4, 13].
LPSim introduces a GPU-accelerated mesoscopic design that models lane-level traffic
flow with extremely high scalability, capable of simulating millions of vehicle movements
per second on modern GPUs [9].
QarSUMO extends SUMO with CUDA-based multi-GPU kernels and ghost-zone
synchronization, enabling deterministic parallelism and faster execution on heterogeneous
computing systems [10].

9

Table 2.1: Comparison of Major Urban Mobility Simulators
Name

Language Paradigm

Strengths

Limitations

SUMO

C++

Flexible, open-

Limited GPU

source, extensive

utilization

Microscopic

documentation
MATSim

POLARIS

Java

C++

Mesoscopic /

Realistic activity- Slow convergence

Agent-based

based demand

under heavy

modeling

loads

Integrates socio-

Partially closed-

economic and

source modules

Agent-based

behavioral layers
LPSim

QarSUMO

CUDA /

GPU Meso-

Extremely fast

Simplified driver

C++

scopic

and highly scal-

behavior assump-

able

tions

GPU Micro-

Deterministic

Early-stage devel-

scopic

parallel kernels,

opment, limited

high throughput

ecosystem

CUDA

These frameworks collectively illustrate the field’s progression from CPU-bound microscopic models to massively parallel, GPU-enabled systems while highlighting persistent
fragmentation in data schemas, calibration strategies, and performance evaluation standards [21, 15, 19].

2.4

Incompatibilities Across Simulators

Although major traffic simulators share similar conceptual foundations, they diverge
sharply in data models, configuration semantics, and runtime assumptions. These differences complicate experiment replication and make direct cross-simulator benchmarking
infeasible without standardized data structures or conversion logic [21, 1, 22, 23].
Key incompatibilities include the following:
• Network representation: Some engines represent detailed lane-level attributes and
turn permissions through edge connections, while others encode signal phases and
intersection logic directly within link or node tables.
• Demand modeling: SUMO and QarSUMO specify explicit trip records (origin,
destination, departure time) in XML, whereas MATSim and POLARIS rely on daily
10

activity plans expressed in XML or database-backed formats [8, 3, 4]. LPSim adopts
columnar CSV or Parquet inputs optimized for GPU throughput [9].
• Signal control: SUMO and MATSim use different representations for traffic light
systems, flat phase tables versus nested hierarchical programs, creating mismatches in
offset and cycle-length semantics.
• Temporal and physical units: Simulators differ in their base time units (seconds
versus milliseconds), velocity representations (m/s versus km/h), and event scheduling
mechanisms (iteration-driven versus event-driven clocks) [2].
• Configuration parameters: Parameters controlling car-following behavior, route
replanning, iteration limits, and random-number seeds differ in naming conventions,
ranges, and internal meaning across engines [12, 13].
These inconsistencies prevent genuine apples-to-apples evaluation of fidelity or performance. A canonical data schema and a set of audited converter modules, introduced
in Section 3.2 are therefore required to harmonize inputs and establish a reproducible
comparison baseline.
Table 2.2: Comparison of inputs and configuration across major simulators.

SUMO

Network

Demand

Signals

Configuration

*.net.xml

*.rou.xml/

TLS *.add.xml

*.sumocfg

signalSystems/

config.xml

trips.xml
MATSim

network.xml

plans.xml(.gz)

signalGroups/
signalControl
POLARIS

CSV / DB

CSV / DB

Engine-specific

JSON

LPSim

CSV / Parquet

CSV / Parquet

Engine-specific

JSON

2.5

Existing Mobility Benchmarks

Previous benchmarking efforts in the transportation modeling domain have primarily
focused on evaluating individual simulators or conducting small-scale “bake-offs” under
limited experimental control. While informative, these studies share several methodological
limitations that restrict reproducibility and generalizability [21, 1, 7]:
1. They are often tied to a single simulator’s native input format, lacking a canonical,
simulator-agnostic schema for cross-engine evaluation.

11

2. They typically omit seed control, version pinning, or hardware-normalized performance
metrics, making results sensitive to environment-specific variability [5, 15, 19].
3. They rarely include release-grade artifacts such as manifests, checksums, or container
images, that allow other researchers to replicate reported findings [24, 16, 17].
4. They frequently apply inconsistent or engine-specific tuning parameters, introducing
bias in fidelity and runtime comparisons across platforms [8, 3, 4, 9, 10].
In contrast, the testing framework proposed in this thesis, SimForge, enforces a unified
canonical data bundle, deterministic adapters for each engine, a fixed-seed execution
policy, and hardware-normalized performance reporting (per core and per watt). These
design principles align with best practices in computational reproducibility and open
benchmarking established in other scientific domains [18, 20, 6].

2.6

Benchmarks in Other Domains

Standardized benchmarking has played a transformative role across multiple fields of computational research. Frameworks such as MLPerf for machine learning, SPEC for system
and processor performance, and ReproZip for computational experiment packaging have
demonstrated how controlled inputs, fixed environments, and open reporting protocols
can accelerate progress and ensure comparability [18, 17, 24, 6]. These initiatives mandate
dataset versioning, environment specification, and public result repositories, practices that
have become foundational to reproducible science [5, 16].
In contrast, the traffic simulation community lacks a standardized, cross-simulator
benchmark with equivalent rigor. Studies are typically conducted in isolation, relying on
bespoke datasets and heterogeneous computing setups, which hinders direct comparison
and long-term reproducibility [21, 1].
This thesis draws explicit inspiration from these established benchmarking ecosystems,
particularly MLPerf’s structured reproducibility checklist and the FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable) data principles which collectively inform the design
of the SimForge canonical schema, execution policies, and validation workflows [18, 20].

2.7

Reproducibility in HPC

Reproducibility in high-performance computing (HPC) environments remains a persistent
challenge due to factors such as non-associative floating-point arithmetic, nondeterministic
thread scheduling, divergent random-number streams, and compiler-dependent optimizations [14, 15, 19]. Even small numerical variations can cascade into macroscopic differences
in traffic dynamics when running agent-based or mesoscopic simulations at scale.
12

To mitigate these threats, SimForge adopts a multi-layered reproducibility strategy:
• Containerization: All simulations execute within pinned-digest containers (OCI/Singularity), ensuring that dependencies, libraries, and compilers remain consistent across
platforms and reruns [24, 16, 17].
• Seed Discipline: A structured seeding scheme assigns one deterministic seed per
unique (city, load, engine, hardware) tuple, with all random-number generator (RNG)
paths explicitly logged for auditability and replay [26].
• Time-Step Policy: A uniform canonical time_step is enforced across all engines,
simulator-specific adapters perform up- or down-sampling as needed while preserving a
documented temporal mapping.
• Hash Verification: All inputs and outputs are cryptographically hashed (SHA-256).
Any detected hash mismatch automatically triggers re-execution on a clean node,
preventing silent divergence and ensuring traceable experiment lineage [6].
This layered approach aligns with emerging best practices for deterministic replay,
containerized workflows, and verifiable computational pipelines in large-scale scientific
simulation [5, 26].

2.8

Summary of Research Gap

Despite substantial progress in simulation modeling and high-performance computing,
several gaps continue to limit the reliability and comparability of urban mobility research
[21, 1, 5, 15]. The most critical limitations include:
• Lack of standardized datasets and evaluation protocols: Existing studies employ
heterogeneous input formats, city networks, and calibration procedures, preventing
reproducible cross-study validation [22, 23].
• Inconsistent reproducibility documentation: Few simulation experiments provide
fixed seeds, containerized environments, or artifact manifests, making replication and
auditability difficult [6, 16, 17].
• Absence of a neutral, open benchmark: There is no established framework that
allows fair, transparent comparison of major simulators under equivalent workloads
and hardware conditions [18, 21, 20].
Collectively, these limitations underscore the need for a reproducible, cross-simulator
testing framework that unifies methodology, data handling, and computational infrastructure, precisely the role that SimForge is designed to fulfill.
13

Chapter 3
Proposed Methodology
This chapter details the methodological framework used to construct SimForge, a reproducible, cross-simulator testing framework for large-scale urban commute simulation. The
approach formalizes how canonical input data are defined, validated, and transformed
into simulator-specific formats, how calibration and execution policies are standardized
across heterogeneous engines, and how experimental runs are conducted under controlled
hardware and software environments. It further specifies the data sources, preprocessing pipelines, evaluation metrics, and reproducibility safeguards that ensure a fair and
auditable comparison across engines. Together, these components establish a unified
methodology that addresses both methodological and infrastructural reproducibility gaps
identified in prior work.

3.1

Framework Overview

The proposed benchmark framework, referred to in this thesis as SimForge, consists
of three primary layers, (1) a standardized Benchmark Framework, (2) controlled
Simulation Experiments across multiple engines, and (3) a unified Evaluation layer
(Figure 3.1). Together, these layers establish a reproducible foundation for cross-simulator
comparison in urban commute modeling.
1. Benchmark Framework: Defines the core experimental foundation, including: (i)
standardized input data bundles for urban networks, travel demand, and traffic signal
control, (ii) minimal calibration parameters required to align behavioral assumptions
across simulators, and (iii) defined evaluation metrics for fidelity, scalability, and
reproducibility [22, 23, 21, 6].
2. Simulation Experiments: Executes urban commute simulations using identical seeds,
datasets, and configuration policies across SUMO, MATSim, POLARIS, LPSim,
and QarSUMO. This layer ensures fair comparison by running each engine within
version-pinned containers and harmonized runtime environments [8, 3, 4, 9, 10, 16].
3. Evaluation Layer: Aggregates simulation outputs and computes key performance
indicators (KPIs) introduced in Section 3.5, covering runtime, fidelity, scalability, and
reproducibility. Interactive dashboards and validation scripts facilitate automated
result verification and audit trails [18, 20].

14

Detailed schema specifications are presented in Section 3.2, and the full benchmark
execution loop is described in Section 3.4.

Figure 3.1: Framework overview: standardized benchmark layer.

3.2

Unified Data Schema Design

Goal: The benchmark defines a canonical, simulator-agnostic data bundle that is validated
once and then deterministically transformed into each simulator’s native input format
(Figure 3.2). This unified schema serves as the backbone of reproducibility by decoupling
scenario definition from simulator-specific syntax and execution semantics [22, 23, 21].

Canonical Bundle (Unified Data Schema)
The benchmark standardizes input data as a mixed-format package chosen for clarity,
scalability, and compatibility with high-performance workflows. The schema is intentionally
neutral, drawing inspiration from the separation of concerns in GTFS and the topological
structure of OpenStreetMap, yet designed to support cross-simulator benchmarking rather
than replication of either [22, 23].
• network.xml - Directed graph specifying road segments, lane counts, speed limits,
capacities, and turn permissions, includes nodes, links, and intersections with an explicit
CRS.
• demand.csv - Columnar trips table containing {origin, destination, departure_time_s,
mode}, scalable to millions of rows and optionally partitioned by city/date for large
scenarios.
15

• signals.xml - Defines signal controllers, phases, offsets, and cycle lengths at controlled
intersections, optional when no explicit signal plans are available.
• config.xml - Encapsulates scenario metadata and runtime parameters such as random
seed, simulation duration, time step, iteration limits, and unit policy.
• manifest.xml - Records dataset version, SHA-256 checksums for all canonical files,
coordinate reference system (CRS), unit conventions, partition layout, and provenance
notes.
Together, these components ensure that each scenario is version-controlled, fully auditable,
and prepared for deterministic, simulator-agnostic transformation within the benchmark
pipeline.

Deterministic Adapters
Each simulator adapter consumes the canonical bundle and generates engine-specific
configurations through a one-to-one, auditable mapping. All conversions are logged
and verified through checksum comparison to guarantee deterministic reproducibility
[24, 16, 17].
• SUMO / QarSUMO: *.net.xml, *.rou.xml/trips.xml, signal programs, and
*.sumocfg.
• MATSim: network.xml, plans.xml(.gz), signalSystems/signalGroups/signalControl, and config.xml.
• POLARIS: Network and demand tables (CSV/DB) with a JSON-based configuration
structure.
• LPSim: Lane and segment-level tables (CSV/Parquet) plus JSON configuration for
GPU execution.

Validation and Provenance
Before any simulation run, a validator enforces type consistency, unit alignment, and
referential integrity as defined in Table 3.1. The validator fixes random seeds and time
bases, declares CRS metadata, and verifies all file checksums recorded in the manifest.xml.
Adapters must guarantee reversible ID mapping and fully documented unit conversions.
This process provides bit-for-bit reproducibility across simulator engines and computing
platforms [6, 26].

16

Figure 3.2: Unified schema pipeline and simulator adapters.

Schema Specification (Field-Level)
Table 3.1 enumerates the canonical entities, their fields, data types, units, and constraints
enforced by the validator. The rules listed below are applied before any adapter execution
to ensure consistency across all engines.

17

Table 3.1: Canonical schema specification with enforced validation rules.
Entity

Field

Type

Units

Constraints / Notes

RoadSegment

id

string

–

Unique: referenced by
Trips/Intersections

Intersection

length

float

meters

>0

lanes

int

–

≥1

speed_limit

float

km/h

>0

capacity

int

veh/h

≥ 0 (optional)

id

string

–

Unique

control_type

enum

–

{signal,

stop,

yield,

iff

con-

none}
signal_plan

JSON

–

Required

trol_type = signal
Trip

origin

string

–

FK → Intersection.id
(or zone id)

destination

string

–

FK → Intersection.id
(or zone id)

departure_time_s

int

seconds

ISO-8601 or integer seconds from t0

mode

enum

–

{car,

transit,

bike,

walk}
Config

seed

int

–

Fixed per experiment:
recorded in manifest

duration

int

seconds

>0

time_step

float

seconds

> 0 (uniform across simulators)

iteration_limit

int

–

For iterative engines
(e.g., MATSim)

Signals

controller_id

string

–

Unique per controller

intersection_id

string

–

FK → Intersection.id

phase_id

string

–

Unique

within

troller
start_time

int

seconds

≥0

duration

int

seconds

>0

offset

18
int

seconds

≥ 0 (optional)

cycle_length

int

seconds

> 0 (optional)

con-

Validator Rules:
• IDs and Foreign Keys: All id fields must be unique: Trip.origin, Trip.destination,
and Signals.intersection_id must resolve without orphan references.
• Coordinate Reference System (CRS): All geospatial data use WGS84 (EPSG:4326)
or a declared CRS with an explicitly recorded transformation.
• Time Base: A single canonical clock in seconds from scenario start (t0 ), adapters
manage conversions to simulator-specific units.
• Units: Length in meters, speed in km/h, capacity in veh/h, all conversions are explicitly
logged by adapters.
• Seeds and Determinism: Config.seed is fixed per experiment, identical inputs and
seeds must yield identical outputs (validated via hash comparison).
• Integrity and Checksums: The manifest.xml file stores dataset version, file SHA256 hashes, and metadata alongside all outputs for traceability.
• Range Constraints: lanes ≥ 1, speed_limit > 0, duration > 0, and time_step
> 0, all enforced at validation time.
• Signal Integrity: If control_type = signal, corresponding Signals entries must
exist with consistent phase_id and timing definitions.

3.3

Data Sources, Acquisition, and Preprocessing

Cities and Observed Baselines
The benchmark uses three U.S. metropolitan networks that provide publicly accessible
baselines for traffic volumes, travel times, and signal control data:
• Chicago (CHI) - dense arterial grid network with coordinated traffic signals and
recurring congestion.
• New York City (NYC) - mixed grid and arterial topology featuring multi-bridge
corridors and high saturation levels.
• Los Angeles (LA) - freeway-dominated network with long arterial stretches and
complex on/off-ramp dynamics.
Observed baselines include: (i) hourly link counts, (ii) corridor-level travel times, and
(iii) official signal control plans when publicly available. Each dataset is partitioned into
distinct calibration and evaluation windows to prevent overfitting and ensure unbiased
performance reporting.
19

Canonical Inputs and Provenance
All raw datasets are transformed into the canonical bundle defined in Section 3.2. Table 3.2
summarizes the provenance, licensing, and preprocessing transformations applied to each
component.
Table 3.2: Data provenance, licensing, and canonical bundle composition.
Canonical File

Source

License

Notes / Transform

network.xml

OpenStreetMap (OSM)

ODbL

Extract administrative AOI,
filter drivable ways, infer lane
count, speed, and turn permissions, generate directed
graph topology.

demand.csv

Public OD matrices /

Varies

planning baselines

Convert zone-level OD matrices into trip-level tables with
time-of-day departure distributions, materialize as columnar demand.csv (optionally
partitioned by city/date) and
sample synthetic agents at
50K/500K/5M scales using
fixed seeds.

signals.xml

City DOT signal plans

Public /

Normalize phase definitions,

(where available)

FOIA

offsets, and cycle lengths,
interpolate missing values,
validate against declared
intersections.

config.xml

This work

MIT

Encapsulates scenario metadata (random seed, duration,
time_step, iteration limits,
and city identifier).

manifest.xml

This work

MIT

Records SHA-256 checksums,
CRS definition, units, data
sources, URLs, and access
timestamps.

Acquisition and Licensing
Networks: OSM extracts are sourced under the Open Database License (ODbL) [22].
The extract date and bounding box are recorded in each scenario’s manifest.xml.
20

Demand: OD matrices are obtained from public planning models or academic
baselines, when detailed trip data are unavailable, synthetic trip tables are generated
using calibrated departure-time profiles, ensuring statistical realism without privacy risks.
Signals: Public signal plan data, when released by municipal DOTs, are parsed and
normalized. In regions without available inventories, intersections default to unsignalized
control or assume a standard cycle template, clearly annotated in the manifest.

Preprocessing Pipeline (to Canonical Bundle)
Each city dataset is processed through a deterministic, containerized preprocessing pipeline
to ensure consistency and reproducibility across runs:
1. AOI Cut and CRS Declaration: Clip network to the administrative area of interest
(AOI) and record CRS metadata (WGS84 / EPSG:4326 or projected equivalent) in the
manifest.
2. Network Normalization: Harmonize lane counts, speed limits, and capacities: derive
directed edge lists and turn permissions at intersections.
3. Demand Synthesis: Convert OD matrices to the trips table format stored as columnar demand.csv (optionally partitioned by city/date) with fields {origin, destination,
departure_time_s, mode}: use a fixed random seed for sampling.
4. Signal Parsing: Convert signal control data to signals.xml including {controller_id,
intersection_id, phase_id, start_time_s, duration_s, cycle_length_s, offset_s}.
5. Validation: Enforce field types, unit consistency, and referential integrity using rules
from Table 3.1, compute checksums and record them in manifest.xml.

Calibration and Evaluation Windows
Each metropolitan scenario is divided into two non-overlapping time windows:
• Calibration window: Used exclusively to identify minimal per-engine tuning parameters during controlled experiments (see Section 3.4).
• Evaluation window: Reserved for final metric computation (see Section 3.5), no
post-hoc adjustments or retuning are permitted.

Privacy and Ethics
No personally identifiable information (PII) is processed. All demand data are either
aggregated (zone-level OD matrices) or synthetically generated from public baselines. Any
21

raw GPS or device-based traces, if ever used in future work, must be anonymized and
excluded from the canonical bundle. Each dataset release includes complete licensing
information and access metadata within the manifest [20].

Limitations of the Data
Certain attributes derived from OSM may omit lane designations or turning restrictions,
and signal inventories are incomplete for some corridors. OD matrices reflect aggregate
travel behavior rather than individual decision-making processes. All assumptions and
inferred parameters are explicitly documented in each scenario’s manifest and revisited
during evaluation to assess sensitivity and potential bias.
Table 3.3: Scenario summary by metropolitan area.
City

Edges

Intersections

Signals

Chicago

95,000

43,000

1,800

Demand (agents)
50K / 500K / 5M (peakbiased)

New York City

120,000

52,000

2,400

50K / 500K / 5M
(mixed bridges)

Los Angeles

110,000

48,000

1,600

50K / 500K / 5M
(freeway-heavy)

3.4

Benchmark Process

Figure 3.3 illustrates the end-to-end workflow employed in this study. Normalized canonical
inputs first pass through a controlled calibration phase, calibrated configurations then
drive the simulation benchmark across engines and hardware environments, and outputs
are aggregated in a unified evaluation layer for metric computation and reporting.

Inputs and Validation
All input datasets are first validated using the schema and integrity checks described
in Section 3.2. Field types and units are verified, foreign keys are resolved, random
seeds and time-step parameters are fixed, and SHA-256 checksums are recorded in the
manifest.xml. Only validated and versioned bundles are permitted for scheduling within
the benchmark queue, ensuring full traceability and reproducibility [6, 20].

22

Calibration Protocol (Deterministic)
Calibration is intentionally designed to be minimal, transparent, and auditable to prevent
overfitting and subjective tuning. The procedure proceeds as follows:
1. Targets: Calibration seeks to minimize discrepancies in (i) link-level traffic volumes
measured by GEH and RMSE metrics and (ii) trip-time distributions evaluated using
the Kolmogorov–Smirnov (KS) statistic against observed baselines.
2. Knobs: Each simulator exposes a limited set of behaviorally relevant parameters such
as car-following aggressiveness, route-choice tolerance, and replanning iterations that
are varied systematically.
3. Search Strategy: A fixed grid search of 3–5 discrete settings per parameter is applied
for each city. No adaptive or stochastic optimization is used, each trial is executed
with a single deterministic random seed.
4. Selection Criterion: The configuration yielding the lowest validation RMSE while
satisfying throughput ≥ real-time/4 on the reference CPU is selected.
5. Lockdown: Selected parameters, software versions, and container digests are recorded
in config.xml, producing a frozen configuration for benchmark runs.

Simulation Benchmark (Engines and Hardware)
For each combination of city (Chicago, New York City, Los Angeles), load (50K /
500K / 5M agents), and engine (SUMO, MATSim, POLARIS, LPSim, QarSUMO),
the framework executes a controlled experiment matrix:
• Execution Environments: All runs occur inside OCI/Singularity containers with
pinned digests, eliminating host dependency [24, 16].
• Job Scheduling: SLURM is used to manage submissions, with one job per
(city, load, engine, hardware) tuple.

CPU affinity and GPU device visibility are

explicitly declared.
• Random Seeds: Each tuple receives a fixed seed: an additional N = 10 repeated
runs are conducted to quantify reproducibility variance.
• Captured Artifacts: Each run logs the full configuration, adapter manifests, stdout/stderr, wall-clock runtime, core/GPU utilization, and output hashes for downstream
verification.

23

Evaluation and Reporting
All outputs are consolidated within the evaluation layer, where the benchmark computes
and visualizes performance indicators:
1. Fidelity: Link-flow fidelity is measured using RMSE and GEH statistics: trip-time
accuracy is assessed via KS distance, aggregated by corridor and at the network level.
2. Scalability: Runtime is analyzed as a function of agent count. Metrics include the
simulation-to-real-time ratio, vehicles-per-second-per-core, and hardware efficiency
across CPU, GPU, and HPC environments.
3. Reproducibility: For each key performance indicator (X), reproducibility is quantified
as R = 1 − σ(X)/µ(X) across repeated runs, any drift exceeding thresholds triggers,
re-execution with the same configuration.
4. Dashboards: Results are presented as reproducible tables and plots summarizing
fidelity, scalability, and reproducibility per engine, including metadata such as environment configuration and container hashes.
The evaluation stage returns validated outputs to the ingestion layer for metric computation
and reproducibility verification.

Failure Handling and Determinism
If validation or post-run verification fails, such as missing identifiers, inconsistent units,
or checksum mismatches, the job is automatically resubmitted on a fresh compute node
using the same seed. Engines exhibiting nondeterministic behavior must document all
sources of variance (e.g., threading, RNG divergence) and provide either a deterministic
execution mode or reproducible RNG mapping [26, 19].

24

Figure 3.3: End-to-end benchmark process with normalized inputs.

3.5

Evaluation Metrics and Analysis

Figure 3.4 illustrates the three principal dimensions along which simulators and hardware
configurations are evaluated: (i) fidelity to observed traffic baselines, (ii) scalability as a
function of agent population, and (iii) reproducibility across repeated, seed-controlled runs.
These dimensions collectively assess both methodological soundness and computational
efficiency within the proposed benchmark.

Datasets and Baselines
Evaluation is conducted across three metropolitan networks: Chicago, New York City,
and Los Angeles, at three simulation scales: 50K, 500K, and 5M agents. Each city
provides independently observed references, including hourly link counts, corridor-level
travel times, and signal control timings, where publicly available. All observed datasets are
partitioned into distinct calibration and evaluation windows to prevent information leakage
and ensure statistically independent testing. Baseline data sources and preprocessing
follow the provenance and validation procedures described in Section 3.3 [21, 1].

Hardware Accounting
Each experiment logs detailed system metadata to ensure traceable and hardware-aware
comparisons. Recorded attributes include CPU/GPU model, core count, clock frequency,
memory, and container image digest. Scalability metrics are reported both in raw form
25

(total runtime, simulation-to-real-time ratio) and in normalized form (vehicles per second
per core and per watt). These normalizations ensure fair comparison across heterogeneous
hardware tiers, including CPU-only nodes, GPU-accelerated systems, and HPC clusters
[15, 19].

Fairness Constraints
To guarantee experimental neutrality and cross-engine fairness, the following methodological constraints are enforced throughout all benchmark runs:
• Fixed calibration grids: Parameter search spaces are defined a priori and remain
identical across engines, no adaptive or stochastic optimization is permitted.
• Uniform execution policy: All engines share identical time_step, random seed,
and scenario duration values. Adapters perform deterministic up or down-sampling to
maintain alignment while recording the transformation mapping.
• No post-hoc tuning: Once the evaluation phase begins, no manual corrections or
parameter adjustments are allowed. Any discovered issue necessitates re-execution of
all affected configurations to preserve reproducibility integrity.
These constraints adhere to reproducible benchmarking best practices widely adopted in
computational sciences [18, 6, 20].

Reporting Artifacts
For each unique (city, load, engine, hardware) configuration, the benchmark publishes a
standardized reporting bundle containing:
• Key performance indicators (KPIs) with 95% confidence intervals.
• Per-corridor fidelity and error tables.
• Runtime and energy-efficiency panels.
• Reproducibility plots computed from repeated trials.
• A complete manifest recording inputs, seeds, container digests, and file checksums.
All plots and tables are generated directly from immutable, hash-verified result files to
ensure traceable and tamper-proof analysis [17, 24, 16].

26

Figure 3.4: Evaluation framework: fidelity, scalability and reproducibility.

3.6

Data Management and Ethics

This study relies exclusively on publicly available datasets: City of Chicago Traffic Counts
(CC BY 4.0), Los Angeles Department of Transportation (LADOT) Traffic Data, and
OpenStreetMap (ODbL). These sources provide network topology, turning-movement
counts, corridor speeds, and aggregate traffic flow information necessary for scenario
construction and calibration. No individual-level trajectories are used. All demand data
are generated from Traffic Analysis Zone (TAZ)-level aggregates and expanded using fixed
random seeds. TAZ cells with fewer than 10 trips are suppressed, and all timestamps are
perturbed by a uniform random jitter of ±60 s to reduce residual re-identification risk.
No direct or indirect personal identifiers are retained.
Access Control: Raw datasets reside on secure, access-controlled university storage.
Only validated canonical bundles and aggregated benchmark outputs are released publicly
under appropriate open-data licenses.
Data Retention: Raw data are retained only for the duration of the project and
deleted no later than 12 months after project completion or according to upstream license
requirements.
Licensing and Attribution: All components follow open-science best practices [20, 6].
The benchmark codebase is released under Apache-2.0, while schemas, adapters, and
derived datasets are distributed under CC BY 4.0. OpenStreetMap-derived artifacts
comply with ODbL share-alike and attribution requirements.

27

3.7

Schedule and Timeline

The project is planned across ten sequential phases spanning September 2025 through July
2026. Tasks are organized to preserve key dependencies (e.g., schema design before HPC
integration) while allowing limited parallel work where appropriate. Figure 3.5 presents
the planned schedule.

Figure 3.5: Planned research timeline from Sep 2025 to Jul 2026.

Milestones
• Background Research: November 2025. This includes literature review on multiengine simulation, benchmark reproducibility, and data schema design.
• Data Acquisition & Curation: December 2025. All network, demand, and signal
datasets for the selected cities will be collected, validated, and prepared for schema
ingestion.
• Plan Submission: December 2025. The full thesis plan will be submitted to
the advisory committee.
• Canonical Schema & Adapters (v1.0): January 2026. The unified XML + CSV
schema and deterministic adapter implementations for SUMO, MATSim, POLARIS,
LPSim, and QarSUMO will be completed.
• Design & Validation Rules: February 2026. Cross-file validators, checksum rules,
and calibration-window specifications will be established.
• HPC Integration: March 2026. Containerized runtime environments will be deployed
on OSC with SLURM support and hardware-logging instrumentation.
28

• Experiments: April 2026. Full end-to-end benchmark runs will be executed across all
simulators, load levels, and hardware tiers.
• Evaluation & Metrics: May 2026. Fidelity, scalability, and reproducibility KPIs will
be computed, analyzed, and plotted.
• Thesis Writing & Revision: May–June 2026. Complete drafting, refining, and
preparing the final manuscript.
• Committee Review & Defense Preparation: June–July 2026. Committee feedback
will be incorporated, and defense materials prepared.

Phase Objectives
• Background Research (Sep–Nov 2025): Complete literature review, identify gaps in
cross-simulator benchmarking, and define the research scope and objectives.
• Data Acquisition & Curation (Nov–Dec 2025): Collect OSM networks, demand
baselines, signal inventories, and institutional datasets (e.g., Cityscape), followed by
preprocessing into schema-ready formats.
• Plan (Dec 2025): Finalize and submit the thesis plan to the advisory committee.
• Canonical Schema & Adapters (Dec 2025–Jan 2026): Develop the unified XML +
CSV schema and implement deterministic adapters for SUMO, MATSim, POLARIS,
LPSim, and QarSUMO.
• Design & Validation Rules (Jan–Mar 2026): Establish cross-file validators, unit/CRS
standards, checksum policies, and the deterministic transformation rules for all simulators.
• HPC Integration (Mar–Apr 2026): Containerize all simulators, configure SLURMbased scheduling, and implement resource/accounting instrumentation on OSC.
• Experiments (Apr–May 2026): Execute the full run matrix across cities, load levels,
simulators, and hardware configurations, including repeated runs for reproducibility.
• Evaluation & Metrics (May–Jun 2026): Compute fidelity, scalability, and reproducibility KPIs: generate plots, tables, and validation summaries.
• Thesis Writing & Revision (Jun 2026): Draft complete thesis chapters, integrate
figures, and revise based on feedback.
• Committee Review & Defense Preparation (Jun–Jul 2026): Incorporate committee feedback, finalize defense slides, and prepare for the oral defense.
29

Dependencies and Buffers
• Hard Dependencies: Schema Freeze → Adapter Completion → Experiment Execution. No simulation runs may begin before schema finalization.
• Compute Buffer: A 10-14 day margin is reserved to accommodate HPC queue delays
or automatic re-runs triggered by validation or checksum failures.
• Data Buffer: City-level dataset revisions are managed through patch versions of the
manifest.xml, any schema-altering change triggers a mandatory re-run for affected
simulators.

30

Chapter 4
Experimental Plan, Environment, and Risks
This chapter outlines the experimental design, compute environment, execution schedule,
and identified risks associated with the proposed SimForge cross-simulator testing
framework and its benchmark experiments. The plan defines the experimental matrix,
describes hardware and software configurations, and formalizes risk mitigation strategies
to ensure reproducibility, scalability, and verifiable results.

4.1

Experimental Matrix

The benchmark evaluates three metropolitan networks at three simulation load levels
across five distinct simulator engines and two hardware tiers. This matrix design balances
coverage and resource feasibility while maintaining methodological control.

Run Count Estimate
The total number of controlled simulation runs is estimated as:
3 (cities) × 3 (loads) × 5 (engines) × 2 (hardware tiers) × 10 (repeats) = 900 runs.
Runs are staged city by city to manage storage overhead and to prioritize completion
of CPU baselines prior to GPU and HPC variants. This staging also allows incremental
validation of adapters and pipelines before scaling up across hardware tiers.

Scenarios and Loads
• Cities: Chicago, New York City, and Los Angeles are selected for their distinct
urban forms and congestion profiles (dense grid, mixed corridor, and freeway-dominant,
respectively).
• Loads: 50K, 500K, and 5M synthetic agents, representing small, medium, and largescale urban commute scenarios.
• Periods: Each dataset is split into non-overlapping calibration and evaluation windows
as defined in Section 3.5, ensuring unbiased KPI computation.

31

Engines and Hardware
• Engines: SUMO, MATSim, POLARIS, LPSim, and QarSUMO, chosen to represent the
major open and high-performance agent-based traffic simulators discussed in Section 2.4.
• Hardware tiers:
– CPU Reference Node: Standardized multicore CPU environment used for
baseline runs and per-core normalization.
– GPU/HPC Node: GPU-enabled or high-performance cluster node, used for
parallel scalability and throughput analysis.
• Repeats: N = 10 replicates per (city, load, engine, hardware) tuple to quantify reproducibility and variance across runs.

Run Definition
Each benchmark run is uniquely identified by the tuple:
(city, load, engine, hardware, seed, time_step, container_digest)
where:
• city - target metropolitan scenario from the canonical bundle (see Section 3.2).
• load - agent population scale (50K / 500K / 5M).
• engine - simulator engine under test.
• hardware - execution environment (CPU or GPU/HPC).
• seed - deterministic random seed ensuring reproducible agent generation and route
assignment.
• time_step - global simulation time increment enforced uniformly across engines.
• container_digest - version-pinned OCI/Singularity image hash ensuring binary reproducibility [24, 16, 17].
All runs are conducted within containerized environments, following the reproducibility
framework and seed discipline outlined in Section 2.7, ensuring that every experiment is
both auditable and repeatable across computational platforms.

32

4.2

Software and Compute Environment

All simulation engines are executed within fully containerized, version-pinned environments
to guarantee portability and bit-level reproducibility across compute platforms.
Containers: Each simulator runs within an OCI/Singularity image identified by its
immutable digest. Containers include all dependencies, compilers, and libraries, ensuring
consistent behavior independent of host environment [24, 16, 17].
Scheduler: Execution is orchestrated via SLURM with explicit CPU pinning and GPU
device visibility. Each job corresponds to a single (city, load, engine, hardware) tuple and
executes independently to avoid cross-interference.
Artifacts: Every run produces a manifest capturing input file checksums, container
digest, wall-clock runtime, resource counters, environment variables, and adapter version.
These metadata form the foundation of reproducibility tracking and verification.
Determinism: All runs use fixed random seeds and a uniform time_step across engines. Key outputs are validated via SHA-256 hash comparison, and any hash mismatch
automatically triggers a re-run on a clean node, preserving experimental determinism.

4.3

Resources and Compute Budget

Hardware: Experiments will utilize Ohio Supercomputer Center (OSC) CPU nodes,
supplemented by one to two A100-class GPU nodes for hardware acceleration tests.
Approximately 1–2 TB of temporary scratch storage is reserved for intermediate outputs
and logs.
Compute Budget: The benchmark is projected to consume approximately 2,500–3,500
node-hours across all runs, including calibration, repeated trials, and validation re-runs.
Execution is staged by city to manage storage overhead and ensure incremental data
validation before scaling to the full matrix.
Data: All inputs are derived from public or academic sources and instantiated as canonical
bundles with per-scenario manifest.xml files (see Section 3.2).

4.4

Risks and Mitigations

The following risks have been identified along with mitigation strategies to ensure project
continuity and reproducibility integrity:
Queue Delays: Potential HPC scheduling backlogs are mitigated by maintaining a
10–14 day buffer in the timeline and performing dry-runs on low-priority queues to test
configurations before large-scale submissions.

33

Adapter Regression: Mapping or translation inconsistencies between canonical and
simulator-native inputs are prevented through golden test cases, adapter snapshotting,
and automated CI-driven hash consistency checks.
Non-Determinism: Variance due to random number generation or multithreading
is controlled through fixed seeds, deterministic execution modes, and enforced re-runs
whenever output hashes diverge [26, 19].
Data Defects: Errors in OpenStreetMap-derived networks or signal plans are caught
by the schema validator (Table 3.1). Any corrections result in a patch version of the
manifest.xml, triggering mandatory re-runs for affected simulators to preserve integrity.

4.5

Limitations and Threats to Validity

This work focuses on reproducible, large-scale commute simulations and intentionally
abstracts away behavioral detail not essential to benchmarking fidelity or performance.
Behavioral Scope: The analysis is restricted to commute-scale KPIs: link volumes and
travel times rather than driver-level heterogeneity or micro-behavioral effects.
Hardware Comparability: While per-core and per-watt normalization mitigates disparities between CPUs, GPUs, and HPC clusters, perfect hardware equivalence is inherently
unattainable.
Geographic Coverage: The benchmark currently includes three U.S. metropolitan
regions, extending the framework to international networks and multimodal datasets is
reserved for future work.

4.6

Deliverables

The project will produce a set of open, verifiable, and reproducible artifacts for the
community:
• Open-Source SimForge Repository: Canonical schema, validators, deterministic
adapters, SLURM execution scripts, and documentation released under permissive
open licenses.
• Run Artifacts: For each benchmark tuple, key performance indicators with confidence
intervals, input/output manifests, checksums, per-corridor error tables, and resource
utilization panels.
• Reproducibility Scorecard: Comparative reports summarizing fidelity, scalability,
and reproducibility metrics across engines and hardware configurations.

34

References
[1] Transportation Research Board, “Survey of urban simulation practices.” TRB Annual
Meeting, 2022.
[2] K. Nagel and A. L. C. Bazzan, “Urban mobility and simulation frameworks,” Procedia
Computer Science, 2019.
[3] A. Horni, K. Nagel, and K. W. Axhausen, The Multi-Agent Transport Simulation
MATSim. Ubiquity Press, 2016.
[4] J. Auld, M. Hope, H. Ley, V. Sokolov, B. Xu, and K. Zhang, “Polaris: Agent-based
modeling framework for transportation,” tech. rep., Argonne National Laboratory,
2016.
[5] S. N. Goodman, D. Fanelli, and J. P. A. Ioannidis, “What does research reproducibility
mean?,” Science Translational Medicine, 2016.
[6] V. Stodden, M. Seiler, and Z. Ma, “An empirical analysis of journal policy effectiveness
for computational reproducibility,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
2018.
[7] T. Studer, M. Regev, and L. Li, “Reproducibility in machine learning benchmarking,”
Nature Machine Intelligence, 2019.
[8] D. Krajzewicz, J. Erdmann, M. Behrisch, and L. Bieker, “Recent development
and applications of sumo—simulation of urban mobility,” International Journal on
Advances in Systems and Measurements, 2012.
[9] N. Cao, X. Zhang, Y. Zhu, and D. Lin, “Lpsim: A massively parallel traffic simulator,”
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2022.
[10] A. Boulmakoul, L. Karim, A. Lbath, et al., “Qarsumo: Gpu-accelerated sumo extensions,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on High Performance
Computing and Simulation (HPCS), IEEE, 2023.
[11] C.-Y. Chan, B. Wang, J. Bachan, and J. Macfarlane, “Mobiliti: Scalable transportation simulation using high-performance parallel computing,” in IEEE High
Performance Extreme Computing Conference (HPEC), IEEE, 2018.
[12] L. Bieker, J. Erdmann, D. Krajzewicz, and M. Behrisch, “Parallel execution and
scalability in sumo,” Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory, 2014.
35

[13] Argonne National Laboratory, “Polaris simulation framework overview,” tech. rep.,
Argonne National Laboratory, 2021.
[14] K. Jackson, L. Ramakrishnan, and K. Runge, “Performance and reproducibility
in parallel scientific computations,” Concurrency and Computation: Practice and
Experience, 2010.
[15] A. Prasad and R. Ghosh, “Challenges in reproducibility for high performance computing,” Future Generation Computer Systems, 2020.
[16] D. Gitman, R. Wallace, and P. Mills, “Container-based environments for scientific
reproducibility,” Computing in Science & Engineering, 2020.
[17] F. Chirigati, R. Rampin, D. Shasha, and J. Freire, “Reprozip: Computational reproducibility with ease,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD International Conference
on Management of Data, ACM, 2016.
[18] MLPerf Consortium, “Mlperf: An industry standard benchmark suite for machine
learning performance,” 2019. Available at MLCommons; accessed 2025.
[19] X. Zhang, L. Huang, and J. Liu, “Towards reproducible parallel simulations,” Journal
of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 2021.
[20] M. D. Wilkinson, M. Dumontier, I. J. Aalbersberg, et al., “The fair guiding principles
for scientific data management and stewardship,” Scientific Data, vol. 3, p. 160018,
2016.
[21] J. Stark and A. Patel, “Benchmarking simulation frameworks for urban mobility,” in
Transportation Research Procedia, 2022.
[22] OpenStreetMap Foundation, “Openstreetmap data model,” 2024. Available at:
openstreetmap.org; accessed 2025.
[23] Google, “General transit feed specification (gtfs) reference,” 2025. Available at:
developers.google.com/transit/gtfs/reference; accessed 2025.
[24] C. Boettiger, “An introduction to docker for reproducible research,” ACM SIGOPS
Operating Systems Review, 2015.
[25] Ohio Supercomputer Center, “Hpc infrastructure overview,” tech. rep., Ohio Supercomputer Center, 2024.
[26] F. Haile, T. Melesse, and D. Lakew, “Deterministic replay in parallel simulations,”
Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience, 2023.
36

[27] B. Chandramouli, J. Gehrke, and A. Quamar, “Reproducibility in hpc computations,”
Computing in Science & Engineering, 2020.
[28] J. Barceló, Fundamentals of Traffic Simulation, vol. 145 of International Series in
Operations Research & Management Science. Springer, 2010.

37

Chapter A
Unified Schema: Worked Examples
This appendix provides concrete, minimally complete examples for each file in the canonical
bundle under the hybrid design: config.xml, network.xml, signals.xml, manifest.xml,
and demand.csv (for which we show a small CSV excerpt and the corresponding column
schema).

A.1

Bundle Overview

The canonical bundle for a single scenario consists of:
• config.xml: scenario metadata and policy (seed, duration, time base).
• network.xml: compact directed network (3 nodes, 2 links), OSM-inspired.
• signals.xml: optional controller with two balanced phases for demonstration.
• demand.csv: trips table (columnar, scalable to millions of rows).
• manifest.xml: checksums, CRS, unit policy, partitions, and provenance.

A.2

config.xml

Example configuration for a 15-minute (900 s) toy scenario.
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<config xmlns="urn:unified:schema:1"
scenario="toy-3node-am"
seed="42"
duration_s="900"
time_step_s="1.0"
iteration_limit="1">
<units length="m" speed="km/h" time="s"/>
</config>

38

A.3

network.xml

A minimal directed network with three nodes (N1–N3) and two links (L12, L23). Speeds
are in km/h and lengths in meters.
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<network xmlns="urn:unified:schema:1" crs="EPSG:3857">
<units length="m" speed="km/h"/>
<nodes>
<node id="N1" x="0.0"

y="0.0"/>

<node id="N2" x="100.0" y="0.0"/>
<node id="N3" x="200.0" y="0.0"/>
</nodes>
<links>
<link id="L12" from="N1" to="N2" lanes="1" length_m="100.0" speed_kmh
="36.0"/>
<!-- 36 km/h = 10 m/s -->
<link id="L23" from="N2" to="N3" lanes="1" length_m="100.0" speed_kmh
="36.0"/>
</links>
<intersections>
<intersection id="I2" node="N2"/>
</intersections>
</network>

A.4

signals.xml

Example of one signal controller at node N2 with two 30-second phases (A and B).
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<signals xmlns="urn:unified:schema:1" crs="EPSG:3857">
<controller id="C_N2" intersection_id="I2" cycle_length_s="60" offset_s
="0">
<phase id="A" start_time_s="0"

duration_s="30"/>

<phase id="B" start_time_s="30" duration_s="30"/>
</controller>
</signals>

39

A.5

demand.csv

For readability in print, we include a tiny excerpt of the canonical demand table
(demand.csv). All times are measured in seconds from scenario start.
origin,destination,departure_time_s,mode
N1,N3,0,car
N1,N3,60,car
N1,N3,120,car
N1,N3,300,car
The canonical schema for demand.csv is defined as:
origin: string
destination: string
departure_time_s: integer
mode: string
For very large scenarios, optional directory-based partitioning may be used to organize
multiple CSV chunks (e.g., by city, date, or demand level). An example organizational
pattern is:
/demand/CHI/2025-11-01/demand_part_000.csv
/demand/CHI/2025-11-01/demand_part_001.csv
...

A.6

manifest.xml

Replace each digest placeholder with the actual SHA-256 for the final artifacts.
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<manifest xmlns="urn:unified:schema:1"
scenario="toy-3node-am"
created_utc="2025-11-04T00:00:00Z">
<crs value="EPSG:3857"/>
<units length="m" speed="km/h" time="s"/>
<sources>
<source key="network">Derived from OSM extract (AOI toy), processed
by this work</source>
40

<source key="demand">Synthetic toy demand generated by this work</
source>
<source key="signals">Synthetic (optional)</source>
</sources>
<artifacts>
<artifact path="config.xml"

algo="sha256" digest="REPLACE_WITH_

SHA256"/>
<artifact path="network.xml"

algo="sha256" digest="REPLACE_WITH_

SHA256"/>
<artifact path="signals.xml"

algo="sha256" digest="REPLACE_WITH_

SHA256"/>
<artifact path="demand.csv"

algo="sha256" digest="REPLACE_WITH_

SHA256"/>
<!-- If using partitioned CSV for large scenarios, list each chunk or
directory:
<artifact path="demand/CHI/2025-11-01" type="csv-partitioned"
algo="sha256-tree" digest="REPLACE_WITH_TREE_HASH"/>
-->
</artifacts>
<demand-schema>
<col name="origin"

type="string"/>

<col name="destination"

type="string"/>

<col name="departure_time_s"

type="int32" units="s"/>

<col name="mode"

type="string"/>

<!-- Optional partition keys for big scenarios -->
<!-- <partitions><key>city</key><key>date</key></partitions> -->
</demand-schema>
</manifest>

A.7

Validators

Each validator enforces structural integrity and cross-file consistency before any run is
scheduled:
• Network (XML): network.xml must validate, all link lengths/speeds positive, each
link’s @from/@to match a node/@id.
41

• Demand (CSV): every origin/destination exists in the network node set:
departure_time_s ≥ 0. For partitioned layouts, validate each CSV chunk independently.
• Signals (XML): total cycle time equals the sum of phase durations, referenced
intersection_id exists.
• Manifest (XML): all digests match current files, CRS and units present and valid,
the demand-schema columns align with the demand.csv header and types.

A.8

XML Schema Integration (XSD)

The unified schema uses a shared XML Schema Definition (XSD) to validate config.xml,
network.xml, signals.xml, and manifest.xml. The XSD provides a machine-checkable
contract for required elements, attribute types, and structural constraints, ensuring that
invalid or incomplete XML artifacts are caught before entering the SimForge pipeline.

Referencing the XSD from XML Files
Each XML file declares the unified namespace and references the XSD, ensuring schemavalidated parsing:
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<config xmlns="urn:unified:schema:1"
xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
xsi:schemaLocation="urn:unified:schema:1 schema/unified-schema-1.
xsd"
scenario="toy-3node-am"
seed="42"
duration_s="900"
time_step_s="1.0"
iteration_limit="1">
<units length="m" speed="km/h" time="s"/>
</config>

Example XSD Fragment (config.xml)
A minimal fragment of the unified XSD defining the config structure:
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<xs:schema xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"
42

targetNamespace="urn:unified:schema:1"
xmlns="urn:unified:schema:1"
elementFormDefault="qualified">
<xs:element name="config">
<xs:complexType>
<xs:sequence>
<xs:element name="units">
<xs:complexType>
<xs:attribute name="length" type="xs:string" use="required"/>
<xs:attribute name="speed"

type="xs:string" use="required"/>

<xs:attribute name="time"

type="xs:string" use="required"/>

</xs:complexType>
</xs:element>
</xs:sequence>
<xs:attribute name="scenario"

type="xs:string"

use="

required"/>
<xs:attribute name="seed"

type="xs:integer" use="

required"/>
<xs:attribute name="duration_s"

type="xs:decimal" use="

required"/>
<xs:attribute name="time_step_s"

type="xs:decimal" use="

required"/>
<xs:attribute name="iteration_limit" type="xs:integer" use="
required"/>
</xs:complexType>
</xs:element>
</xs:schema>

Network Keys and References
The XSD enforces node uniqueness and link consistency using xs:key/xs:keyref:
<xs:element name="network">
<xs:complexType>...</xs:complexType>
<!-- each node/@id must be unique -->
43

<xs:key name="k_node_id">
<xs:selector xpath="nodes/node"/>
<xs:field xpath="@id"/>
</xs:key>
<!-- link endpoints must reference existing nodes -->
<xs:keyref name="r_link_from" refer="k_node_id">
<xs:selector xpath="links/link"/>
<xs:field xpath="@from"/>
</xs:keyref>
<xs:keyref name="r_link_to" refer="k_node_id">
<xs:selector xpath="links/link"/>
<xs:field xpath="@to"/>
</xs:keyref>
</xs:element>
These constraints prevent malformed networks (e.g., dangling link endpoints) from
entering the canonical bundle.

Schema Validation Commands
As part of preprocessing and CI, each XML artifact is validated via:
xmllint --noout --schema schema/unified-schema-1.xsd config.xml
xmllint --noout --schema schema/unified-schema-1.xsd network.xml
xmllint --noout --schema schema/unified-schema-1.xsd signals.xml
xmllint --noout --schema schema/unified-schema-1.xsd manifest.xml
For the demand table, the pipeline verifies that the demand.csv columns and types
match the demand-schema block in manifest.xml using a short script (e.g., pandas or
Polars).

Cross-File Validation
While XSD validates structure within each individual file, cross-file rules (e.g., ensuring
demand origins/destinations appear in network.xml or signal controllers reference valid
intersections) are enforced by the validator described in Section A.7. Together, the XSD
and cross-file validator form a complete integrity and reproducibility layer for the unified
schema.

44

